# A manager for TLA projects

- By Adrien Champion, Keryan Didier, Steven de Oliveira, [OCamlPro](https://ocamlpro.com/).

*Matla* is a **ma**nager for [**TLA**+](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tools.html) projects
written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org) and pronounced like
[*"matelas"*](https://translate.google.com/?hl=en&sl=fr&tl=en&text=matelas&op=translate), which is
French for *"mattress"*. It is heavily inspired by [*cargo*](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo), the
critically acclaimed Rust project manager.

> This user manual assumes you are familiar with *TLA+* and its associated verification engine
> *TLC*.
<!-- > If you are not, [this appendix](../app_tla/readme.md) goes over the basics of TLA+ and TLC. -->

Matla is not a big project, it is inspired by cargo but nowhere near as complex or feature-packed.
We develop matla with three things (a *trifecta* of sorts) in mind: safety (confidence in the code
and thus the analysis), simplicity and ergonomics. This last aspect is not here for PR reasons: as
heavy Rust users, we recognize how nice an experience it is to interact with a tool with readable,
colored output, and where each interaction shows a great deal of care for user-friendliness.

\
\

There is a [TLDR](#tldr) at the end of this file for crash course on using matla.

\
\

Matla is still very young. There are many issues to address; some of them have to do with quirks at
TLC-level, others are just blind spots that we have not triggered yet in our use of matla. If you
run into some of these problems, consider [opening an issue][issues] to help us improve matla 😸


## Main features currently implemented

Motivated in the next section and discussed in details in the rest of this document:

- retrieve/handle/update the TLA+ toolbox `tla2tool.jar` behind the scenes;
- convenient automatic project initialization;
- deal with the files generated by TLC's analyses cleanly, in a `gitignore`d `target` folder where
  all compilation/run artifacts live;
- allow users to have a global configuration (specifying TLC arguments such as `seed`, `difftrace`,
  ...), (potentially/partially) overridden by the project configuration, (potentially/partially)
  overridden by command-line configuration (options);
- handling integration tests in a directory that's distinct from the main source directory;
- debug assertions, *i.e.* assertions checked in `debug` mode but compiled away in `release`
  mode (the mode is specified by users whenever they call matla, *e.g.* `matla run --release`);
- modernized output with clearer error messages: very much WIP at the moment, most likely requires
  a collaboration with the TLC team;
- pretty, readable counterexample traces.


## Features we are considering implementing soon-ish

Very strong emphasis on **soon-ish**:

- unit tests specified in TLA+ source files;
- documentation tests specified in comments in the TLA+ source files;
- documentation generation: the TLA+ toolbox can generate a very nice PDF of the sources using
  LaTeX, but on big projects the lack of hyperlinks, search bar, *etc.* can be quite frustrating.
  It is also not clear we can have documentation tests appear nicely in the documentation using
  TLA+ toolbox's documentation capabilities. Also, we are quite fond of markdown as a (code)
  documentation language given how simple and universal it has become (for better or worse);


## Features we might consider at some point

- notion of dependency (library), most likely building on `git`-based online services;
- optional static type-checking: quite ambitious as it requires parsing, representing and
  manipulating (subsets of) the TLA+ language. Do not hold your breath.

## TL;DR

- [install](../setup) by retrieving [the latest release][release] or using cargo

    `cargo install https://github.com/OCamlPro/matla#latest`

- [setup](../setup/setup.html), required unless you plan to run in *portable mode* (`matla --portable ...`/`matla -p ...`)

    `matla setup`

- [initialize](../project) a project directory

    `matla init`

- [run](../run) `top.tla`/`top.cfg`

    `matla run top`
    
    or `matla run` if there is only one `.tla`/`.cfg` pair in the project directory

- [run tests](../testing) (modules with `.tla` and `.cfg` files) in `<proj_dir>/tests`

    `matla test`

- you will probably want to read about [matla's user/project/cla configuration hierarchy](../run/conf.html)

[release]: https://github.com/OCamlPro/matla/releases
[issues]: https://github.com/OCamlPro/matla/issues